
These programs make dubious requests of an X server, doing things such
as snooping for keypresses.  The purpose of the programs is to test
the effectiveness of X security extensions.


Tests:


* grab-server

Grabs server.  Total denial of service, until process is killed or it
releases the grab.  This test releases the grab after 5 seconds.


* grab-keyboard

Grab the keyboard.  The client receives all keyboard input, even if
the input focus is changed.

Note the effect this has on Gtk: you can no longer open menus.  Gtk
tries to grab the keyboard itself while opening a menu, and its
failure to do so prevents the menu from being opened.


* grab-pointer

Grab the pointer.  The client receives all mouse input.

This also prevents Gtk opening menus, which you would normally be able
to do by pressing the Menu key.


* key-injector

Repeatedly send a keypress event to the window with the current input
focus.

Note that the "send_event" bit will be set in these events, and some X
clients will notice this and ignore the event.  This includes xterm
and XEmacs.  Gtk clients (e.g. gnome-terminal) do not ignore the
event, however.


* key-injector-xtest

Fakes key press events using the XTest extension.  The key presses are
treated by X as if they were entered through the keyboard, so are
processed according to the current input focus, keyboard grabs, etc.
Unlike key presses sent using SendEvent, X clients can't ignore these.


* key-sniffer

Select for keypress events on the window that currently has the input
focus, and print keypresses.  Both the key-sniffer client and the
window's owner receive the key press event.


* steal-focus

Opens a window and assigns the input focus to it every second using
XSetInputFocus().  i.e. Steals the input focus.  Kill the client by
closing the window.


* warp-pointer

Move the pointer around in a circle using XWarpPointer().


* screen-grab

Takes a snapshot of the screen using XGetImage(), copying the image
data to the client.  Displays the image in a window.


* background-none

Opens a window without a background colour defined.  Allows the
contents of the windows below to show through.



Other tests:

xwd -root | xwud
- take screenshot and display it in window

echo 'hello' | xclip
- copy to the clipboard

xclip -o
- read what's on the clipboard

xeyes
- detects mouse movements outside the client's own windows
- uses Shape extension to show a partially-transparent window

xdpyinfo
- lists X extensions
