.TH plash\-run\-emacs 1   
.SH NAME
plash\-run\-emacs \- Run XEmacs and then grant it access to individual files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
def \fIedit_file\fR = capcmd plash\-run\-emacs \fIoptions...\fR

\fIedit_file\fR => \fIfile\-you\-want\-to\-edit.txt\fR &
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
This lets you run XEmacs without initially giving it access to any of
your personal files. You can grant the XEmacs process access to
individual files or directories when you want to edit or view them.
.PP
XEmacs is a large and complex system. It doesn't have any internal
security, and it gives ELisp programs access to everything that it has
access to. You might not want to trust XEmacs with access to all your
files. \fIplash\-run\-emacs\fR helps ensure that XEmacs is only doing
what you expect it to.
.PP
This program only works with XEmacs at the moment. GNU Emacs doesn't
work under Plash yet.
.PP
This program is similar to \-\- and replaces \-\- gnuserv and
gnuclient. gnuclient is a command that sends a
message to XEmacs asking it to open a file to edit. Similarly,
plash\-run\-emacs returns an object that will ask XEmacs to
edit a given file \-\- but it will also give XEmacs a reference to the
file, giving XEmacs access to it.
.PP
The \fIplash\-run\-emacs\fR command is only useful when called using a
"capcmd" expression from Plash.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
Returns an executable object, \fIedit_file\fR, using the "return_cont"
mechanism. (You can bind this to a variable in the shell using the
"def" syntax. \fIedit_file\fR can be any variable name.)
.PP
You can use \fIedit_file\fR to open files in XEmacs. Give it some
filenames as arguments. You need to use "=>" for the shell to grant
write access to those files.
.SH NOTES
By default, the Plash shell doesn't grant access to the X Window
System. You'll have to enable that with the command:
.PP
.nf

plash\-opts /x=options 'enable_x11' 'on'
.fi
.SH LIMITATIONS
The X Window System is not secure, so actually the XEmacs process can
still potentially get all of the user's authority.
.PP
XEmacs still has unlimited ability to connect to the Internet.
.PP
Doesn't work with GNU Emacs.
.PP
You must use a shell command to open a file in XEmacs. You can't get
an "Open File" dialogue box directly from XEmacs itself. This is to
be implemented in the future. The "Open File" dialogue box is known
as a "powerbox" when it grants access to the file in question.
.PP
There isn't a good way to review what authority you have granted
XEmacs, or revoke that authority.
.PP
It's best to invoke \fIedit_file\fR with "&" to get the shell to put
the job in the background. This is a problem with the shell itself:
for each job, it starts a server process that hosts the file objects
the job was granted access to. When a job is run in the foreground,
the shell waits for the server process to exit. This is arguably the
wrong behaviour. If you press Ctrl\-C to stop the \fIedit_file\fR job,
you'll terminate the server process, and the files you granted to
XEmacs using this job will disappear from its namespace.
.PP
When XEmacs tries to save backup files, that won't work. This
generates annoying warnings. XEmacs doesn't have authority to create
files with names other than the ones it was explicitly granted access
to. This could be best fixed in a powerbox design.
.SH "HOW IT WORKS"
plash\-run\-emacs builds a file namespace for XEmacs in a
way similar to how the Plash shell builds file namespaces. The
difference is that in this case, it can add entries to the namespace
dynamically. The file namespace that XEmacs sees will typically be a
subset of the user's file namespace.
.PP
plash\-run\-emacs maps an executable object
\fB/bin/plash\-gnuserv\fR into XEmacs's file namespace. This
works like gnuserv. It talks to XEmacs via a pseudo\-tty or
a pipe (in this case, a pipe, because XEmacs is not given the ability
to create pseudo\-ttys). It provides a way for ELisp code to talk to
the outside world. It's an executable object and is actually
implemented by the plash\-run\-emacs process. It is
necessary because ELisp doesn't provide enough communications
primitives. If you could connect to a Unix domain socket directly
using ELisp, there would be no need for
\fB/bin/plash\-gnuserv\fR.
.PP
plash\-run\-emacs is untrusted. It has the same authority as
XEmacs (it runs with the same UID). In the future, it might implement
a powerbox. Then it would need to be trusted. It would need access
to the user's namespace (ie. all your files), so it would need to
start XEmacs under a different UID.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf

def edit =
  capcmd ~/projects/plash/bin/run\-emacs
     \-iconic
     \-l ~/projects/plash/src/plash\-gnuserv.el
     + ~/config ~/.emacs
       => ~/Mail ~/.im /tmp);
.fi
.SH "SEE ALSO"
plash, plash\-socket\-publish, plash\-run\-emacs, xemacs, gnuclient
.PP
/usr/share/doc/plash
.SH AUTHOR
Mark Seaborn <mseaborn@onetel.com>
