.TH plash\-opts 1   
.SH NAME
plash\-opts, plash\-opts\-gtk \- Set options in the Plash shell
.SH SYNOPSIS
From the Plash shell:
.PP
.nf
plash\-opts /x=options [\fIoption\-name\fR \fIvalue\fR]
.fi
.PP
.nf
plash\-opts\-gtk /x=options
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The Plash shell has a few options you can set. There is an object
bound to the variable "options" for setting the options. These
programs will invoke that object.
.PP
plash\-opts\-gtk opens a window using Gtk for setting the
options. plash\-opts works just via the command line.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 
enable_x11 on/off
When this is on, the shell will automatically grant programs
access to the X11 Window System. Enabling it is equivalent to
adding the argument list "+ ~/.Xauthority => /tmp/.X11\-unix" every
command invocation.

This option is switched off by default because X11 is not secure!
X servers provide no isolation between the clients connected to
them. One client can read keyboard input that goes to other
clients, grab the screen's contents, and feed events to other
clients, including keypress events. So \fIpotentially\fR, an
X client can gain the full authority of the user.
.TP 
log_summary on/off
.TP 
log_messages on/off
.TP 
log_into_xterm on/off
.TP 
print_fs_tree on/off
When this is enabled, the shell prints the contents of the
file namespace of each process that it starts. This is a tree
showing pathnames at which objects and slots have been attached.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
plash\-opts /x=options 'enable_x11' 'on'
.fi
.SH "SEE ALSO"
plash(1)
.PP
/usr/share/doc/plash
.SH AUTHOR
Mark Seaborn <mseaborn@onetel.com>
