.TH run\-as\-anonymous 1   
.SH NAME
run\-as\-anonymous \- Start process with an unused UID, in a chroot() environment
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
run\-as\-anonymous \fIcommand\fR \fIargs...\fR
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
run\-as\-anonymous is a small setuid\-root program for starting processes
such that they are isolated from the rest of the system. It chooses a
UID for the process that is not being used by other processes. It
sets the process's root directory using chroot().
.PP
run\-as\-anonymous is part of Plash. Plash uses it to give a user
protection from the programs they run.
.PP
Only a small part of Plash, including run\-as\-anonymous, needs root
access to install. If you are a system administrator, this means you
can inspect this part and install it in confidence that it won't
interfere with the rest of your system. You don't have to trust the
rest of Plash, which is more complex \-\- though your users will trust
the rest of Plash if they use it.
.SH "THE CHROOT() JAIL"
The chroot() jail directory is typically \fB/var/lib/plash\-chroot\-jail\fR. It needs to be on a writable filesystem
because it contains a lock directory.
.PP
The jail directory typically contains one directory, \fBspecial\fR, which \fIcan\fR be writable by a normal user without
effectively giving that user root authority. (This is not relevant if
you are installing an RPM or Debian package of Plash.)
.PP
The jail directory should \fInot\fR be writable by a normal
user. If this were so, the user could hard link a setuid\-root
executable into the jail directory, and put a file \fBlib/ld\-linux.so.2\fR containing their own code into the jail directory.
Running this executable using run\-as\-anonymous would run the user's
code with root permission. The user would effectively have root
authority.
.PP
The idea behind the \fBspecial\fR directory is that no
setuid\-root executable will depend on the contents of \fB/special\fR.
.PP
Typically, \fBspecial\fR will only contain Plash's version of
glibc's dynamic linker, \fBld\-linux.so.2\fR. The dynamic
linker is invoked as an executable. It will load a normal executable
from a file outside the chroot jail, via the file descriptors that it
is passed. run\-as\-anonymous does execve() after changing the root
directory, so there needs to be an executable in the chroot jail to
call execve() on.
.SH "ALLOCATING USER IDS"
run\-as\-anonymous allocates UIDs from a numeric range that is specific
as a compile time option (typically 0x100000 to 0x200000) \-\- see
config.sh.
.PP
It creates lock files to ensure that UIDs are not re\-used. The lock
files are typically kept in \fB/var/lib/plash\-chroot\-jail/plash\-uid\-locks\fR.
.PP
The program gc\-uid\-locks can be run every so often to remove lock
files when the corresponding UID is no longer used by any process.
.PP
The file \fB/var/lib/plash\-chroot\-jail/plash\-uid\-locks/flock\-file\fR is locked using
flock() to ensure that gc\-uid\-locks does not run concurrently with any
instance of run\-as\-anonymous.
.SH "AUTHORITY GRANTED AND DENIED"
Putting a process in a chroot() jail can deny it the ability to open
most files. Giving a process a unique UID denies the ability to send
signals to other processes (using kill()) or take over other processes
(using ptrace()).
.PP
A process can communicate with the outside world using the file
descriptors it was created with, including receiving other file
descriptors (via Unix domain sockets). This is how Plash grants a
process authority, after run\-as\-anonymous has taken away authority
that could be exercised through the more usual system calls.
.PP
Note that if a process receives a directory file descriptor, it can
use that to break out of its chroot() jail, using fchdir(). Plash is
careful not to pass a process any directory file descriptors.
.PP
run\-as\-anonymous does not prevent a process from connecting to or
listening on network sockets.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
gc\-uid\-locks, plash
.PP
/usr/share/doc/plash
.SH AUTHOR
Mark Seaborn <mseaborn@onetel.com>
